.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

.. |u8| replace:: :c:type:`u8 <u8>`
.. |u16| replace:: :c:type:`u16 <u16>`
.. |ssam_dbgdev_request| replace:: :c:type:`struct ssam_dbgdev_request <ssam_dbgdev_request>`
.. |ssam_request_flags| replace:: :c:type:`enum ssam_request_flags <ssam_request_flags>`

=======================================
SSAM Debug Device and DebugFS Interface
=======================================

The ``surface_sam_debugfs`` module provides a DebugFS interface for the SSAM
controller to allow for a (more or less) direct connection from userspace to
the SAM EC. It is intended to be used for development and debugging, and
therefore should not be used or relied upon in any other way. Note that this
module is not loaded automatically, but instead must be loaded manually.

The provided interface is accessible through the ``ssam/controller``
device-file in debugfs, so, if the conventional mount path is being used,
``/sys/kernel/debug/ssam/controller``. All functionality of this interface
is provided via IOCTLs.


Controller IOCTLs
=================

The following IOCTLs are provided:

.. flat-table:: Controller IOCTLs
   :widths: 1 1 1 1 4
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Type
     - Number
     - Direction
     - Name
     - Description

   * - ``0xA5``
     - ``0``
     - ``R``
     - ``GETVERSION``
     - Get DebugFS controller interface version.

   * - ``0xA5``
     - ``1``
     - ``WR``
     - ``REQUEST``
     - Perform synchronous SAM request.


``GETVERSION``
--------------

Defined as ``_IOR(0xA5, 0, __u32)``.

Gets the current interface version. This should be used to check for changes
in the interface and determine if certain functionality is available. While
the interface should under normal circumstances kept backward compatible, as
this is a debug interface, backwards compatibility is not guaranteed.

The version number follows the semantic versioning scheme, roughly meaning
that an increment in the highest non-zero version number signals a breaking
change. It can be decomposed as follows:

.. flat-table:: Version Number Format
   :widths: 2 1 3
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Offset (bytes)
     - Type
     - Description

   * - ``0``
     - |u8|
     - Major

   * - ``1``
     - |u8|
     - Minor

   * - ``2``
     - |u16|
     - Patch

The interface version is currently ``0.1.0``, i.e. ``0x00010000``.


``REQUEST``
-----------

Defined as ``_IOWR(0xA5, 1, struct ssam_dbgdev_request)``.

Executes a synchronous SAM request. The request specification is passed in
as argument of type |ssam_dbgdev_request|, which is then written to/modified
by the IOCTL to return status and result of the request.

Request payload data must be allocated separately and is passed in via the
``payload.data`` and ``payload.length`` members. If a response is required,
the response buffer must be allocated by the caller and passed in via the
``response.data`` member. The ``response.length`` member must be set to the
capacity of this buffer, or if no response is required, zero. Upon
completion of the request, the call will write the response to the response
buffer (if its capacity allows it) and overwrite the length field with the
actual size of the response, in bytes.

Additionally, if the request has a response, this should be indicated via
the request flags, as is done with in-kernel requests. Request flags can be
set via the ``flags`` member and the values correspond to the values found
in |ssam_request_flags|.

Finally, the status of the request itself is returned in the ``status``
member (a negative value indicating failure). Note that failure indication
of the IOCTL is separated from failure indication of the request: The IOCTL
returns a negative status code if anything failed during setup of the
request (``-EFAULT``) or if the provided argument or any of its fields are
invalid (``-EINVAL``). In this case, the status value of the request
argument may be set, providing more detail on what went wrong (e.g.
``-ENOMEM`` for out-of-memory), but this value may also be zero. The IOCTL
will return with a zero status code in case the request has been set up,
submitted, and completed (i.e. handed back to user-space) successfully from
inside the IOCTL, but the request ``status`` member may still be negative in
case the actual execution of the request failed after it has been submitted.

A full definition of the argument struct is provided below:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/misc/surface_sam/clients/surface_sam_debugfs.c
   :functions: ssam_dbgdev_request
